The Project Gutenberg EBook of Burton Island State Park: Guide to the
Interpretive Nature Trail and Hiking Trail, by Stephen Antil

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Burton Island State Park: Guide to the Interpretive Nature Trail and Hiking Trail

Author: Stephen Antil

Release Date: November 16, 2019 [EBook #60709]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BURTON ISLAND STATE PARK ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          --STATE OF VERMONT--




                       _Burton Island State Park_


       _Guide to the Interpretive Nature Trail and Hiking Trail_

                               _written and illustrated by Stephen Antil
                                                        Park Naturalist_

    [Illustration: Burton Island]

  nature center
  marina
  office
  nature walk
  hiking trail
  interpretive trail
  Island Road
  Landfill Dump

  This Trail guide is for the hiking trail and interpretive trail which
  start past the white cabins and behind the nature center

The interpretive nature trail will take 30 minutes to walk. The numbers
in this pamphlet correspond to the numbered sign posts on the trail. It
is advisable that you wear shoes when walking the trails. The scenic
hiking trail can be hiked in one to one and a half hours and will take
you to the southeast tip of the island and back.

You can help the naturalist maintain good hiking conditions on these
trails by carrying out what you carry in.

Many of Vermont's wildflowers are protected. Therefore, it is suggested
that all wild flowers be left in their natural environment for the next
person to enjoy.

The land surrounding Burton Island and the area of Northern Lake
Champlain was once the hunting grounds of the Iroquois and Algonquin
Indians. It was here that these people hunted and fished for their
survival. Hunting and trapping for wolves, deer, mink and elk, and
fishing for salmon, trout and bass, the Iroquois and Algonquin found an
abundance of game.

    [Illustration: (Indian agriculture)]

As white men increased, agriculture began to dominate this area. In the
late 1700's, Burton Island was cleared and tilled by Jesse Weldon, a
settler and agent for the Allen family--Ethan, Ira and Levi.

In 1840, C.C. Burton owned the island and hired a family to live here
and manage his farm.

Ida Lashaway acquired the land in 1928. During this time, the Lashaway
family continued to till the land and raise livestock.

In 1944, farming operations were discontinued. From that time until the
present, we have had the opportunity to see what role mother nature can
play in returning the land to a natural state. The signs of farming are
still here, but for the last three decades natural forces have been left
relatively unchallenged.


1

Today we can see the stories of the past and present etched across the
face of Burton Island. An old farm in horse-drawn buggy days was left to
the mercy of warm summer rains and icy winter storms. We can see the
land, once a pasture, now swelling into overgrown fields and forests
where wild plants and animals compete to live in a continually changing
habitat.


2

Before you lies what was formerly pasture-land. Fields exist when they
are mowed or grazed. As a field is left untended, goldenrod, milkweed,
morning glories and raspberry bushes appear and compete for sunlight.
This is the first stage of a succession of various plants and animals
passing from an old farm field into what will someday be a forest. Two
common field birds found here are the meadowlark and the bobolink.

    [Illustration: (meadowlark)]


3

On the dead goldenrod stalks are round and oval-shaped outgrowths known
as galls. A gall is an abnormal growth of a plant resulting from an
insect or bacterial irritation. The round, one-inch galls are caused by
the _Eurosta Fly_. The long, oval growths contain eggs and larvae from
the _goldenrod gall moth_. Eggs were laid within the stem causing an
irritation which stimulated plant cell production. A cozy home formed
for the larvae. Before they developed into the flies, they ate their way
out--look for the small holes in the old galls.

    [Illustration: cross-section of Gall]


4

The farm equipment here was used on the farm of C.C. Burton. The plow
and rake were both horsedrawn. The plow broke the soil for planting, and
the rake gathered hay for stacking. These implements are reminders of
our heritage.

Farm life in America was hard, the tools were basic. From the simplicity
of an agricultural existence close to the land, America has grown into a
complex, technological country. But, our dependence on the earth is
still as vital.


5

This is the foundation and remains of the barn owned by Mr. Burton in
the 1800's and the Lashaway family in the early 1900's.

During the 1800's, the barn held 15 milk cows. The family that worked
the farm raised 500 turkeys, 200 sheep, pigs, horses and chickens. The
farm was relatively self-sufficient. The work was done with teams of
horses or by hand. Ice was cut from Lake Champlain each winter and was
stored in an icehouse. Cow stanchions mark where cows were once milked.
Butter was churned here. Many sheep were probably shorn of their coats
right where you stand.

All farm produce was taken to a St. Albans market either across the reef
or drawn across the ice in the winter.

    [Illustration: (cow stanchion)]

Traces of the farm are quickly vanishing beneath the flourish of
thickets and sumac.


6

The family managing the farm lived in the house above the foundations.
The children went to school in St. Albans and travelled by boat or over
ice almost every day. In the spring, when the ice was too thin to walk
on but too thick for boats, it was necessary for children to board with
friends on the mainland.

In 1928, Ida Lashaway and her family continued to work the farm. Through
their efforts, some of the finest hay in the state was cultivated here.

Mr. and Mrs. Randall Dimon purchased the farm in 1944. Farming
operations were discontinued. However, the Dimons continued to maintain
some fields and raised yellow-eyed beans and hay. Several local
residents of St. Albans pastured heifers as well as other livestock on
the island.

    [Illustration: (raking hay)]

In 1961, the State of Vermont purchased the island, and the Department
of Forests and Parks began operating it as a State Park.


7

This maple tree was blown down by high winds last summer. Heavy storms
come quickly here, and trees and plants living near the shore must be
especially hardy to withstand the effects of wind, water and ice. The
erosive actions of these forces cause the shore to be battered and worn
like a seacoast.

The downed maple will continue living as long as part of its root
structure can supply the tree with water and nutrients and as long as
its leaves can embrace the rays of the sun. In years to come, the
branches may eventually become trunks themselves, growing upward and
thickening into individual trees with one massive base.


8

In fields, grasses and small brush soon yield to shrubs and small trees
such as sumac and hawthorne. These plants are the start of the forest
and begin to limit the light striking the earth. Plants such as
goldenrod and raspberry depend on light for their survival. Unable to
obtain it, they are suppressed.

    [Illustration: (sumac and hawthorne)]

Hawthorne were rare trees in the virgin forests of America, but with the
clearing of forests, they became common. Today they are found in fields,
along fence rows and in small clusters, for they are fond of the sun.
The dense, thorny branches create a crown which is almost impregnable.
The trees provide excellent nesting sites for many kinds of songbirds
due to the excellent protection the trees give their occupants.

    [Illustration: Blackburnian Warbler]

  orange head


9

This dead, old hawthorne has served as a home for many animals. Over a
period of years, the tree has rotted and has been occupied by fungi,
carpenter ants and beetles. This drew hungry woodpeckers which have
tapped holes in the tree in search of food. Gradually, the tree has been
hollowed out. Birds and chipmunks probably have used the tree for hiding
or nesting.

    [Illustration: white-breasted nuthatch]


10

When we stepped out of the shady cluster of shrubby trees into this
clearing, did you notice the drastic change in the kind of vegetation?
Raspberry brambles crowd each other for sunlight. Where there is no
canopy to limit sunlight, a brushy habitat abounds. You may see some
special wildlife here--bird, rabbit and fox.

    [Illustration: cottontail]


11

We are now standing under a canopy of white cedar and poplar. The young
saplings growing on this forest floor are maples and hickories. These
young hardwoods enjoy living in the shade. Their need for sunlight is
not great. Eventually, these saplings will outgrow the aspen and cedars.
When that day comes, a forest of maples and hickories will restrict
sunlight from penetration. The cedars and aspen will die.


12

These beautiful sugar maples have large crowns which shade an extensive
area. Plants needing sunlight cannot grow beneath the large trees. The
skeletons of dead cedars demonstrate that species' inability to get
sunlight and compete with the maples. In this habitat, raccoons,
nuthatches, squirrels and bluejays are commonly found.

    [Illustration: (bluejay)]


13

This maple tree was tapped for its sap many years ago. Can you see the
tap holes? These holes have been partially grown over and have healed.

    [Illustration: (tapping maple tree for sap)]


14

This ancient shagbark hickory has actually grown around the rusted
barbed wire left from the old farm. Cows from Mr. Burton's farm probably
lingered beneath the tree to find relief from the hot sun. This tree is
over 150 years old.

Hickory wood is particularly strong, heavy and flexible and was used for
manufacturing agricultural tools--most commonly axe handles, and spokes
and rims for wagon wheels.

    [Illustration: Shagbark Hickory]


15

At this point, you have the opportunity of continuing either upon the
remainder of the interpretive nature trail or upon the scenic hiking
trail. The shorter interpretive loop turns to the right and contains
stations 16 through 19 which may be followed on the next several pages.

Should you decide upon the scenic hiking trail, follow the trail markers
to your left. This trail runs to the end of the island and along some
beautiful vistas of Lake Champlain. Turning to page 14, you will find a
brief guide which we hope will bring to your attention many of the
interesting features along this path.


16

This is one of the highest points on the island. Look around you. We
have seen the changes from field to bramble patches, from shrubby
clusters to large trees making up a forest habitat. This is natural
succession, the change from field to forest. With this change of plants
comes the change of animals, for animals and plants depend on each other
and form a natural community.

The serenade of piping birds, the rhythmic waves of Champlain, the
whispering trees--these sounds cannot help but deepen our appreciation
and enjoyment of the forest. Close your eyes and listen peacefully.

    [Illustration: (succession of fauna)]

  1--annuals, perennials
  2--shrubs, trees
  3--climax forest


17

The area before you is moist and marshy. As you can see, plants growing
here differ a great deal from those in dryer, hillier regions of the
island. Sweet Flag (leaves like Cattails) is a dominant plant here.


18

This pathlike gully was once a drainage ditch leading to the marshy
meadow. Foxes have been using them as passageways when navigating
through the brush in search of food.

Red fox prefer to live on the edges of fields or in open country. Meadow
mice are probably the number one food item of the fox. Young foxes
consume large numbers of beetles, grasshoppers and crickets. They eat
all types of berries, melons and corn.

    [Illustration: (red fox)]


19

A shrub or small tree from 5 to 20 feet, the staghorn sumac is a
prevalent and important plant on Burton Island.

The sumac provides a source of shelter and food for many animals here.
The staghorn sumac's umbrella-like canopy furnishes shade to birds in
the hot days of summer. It serves as a refuge during rain storms. Birds
can easily disappear in the maze of leaves and branches in time of
danger. The pink berry-like clusters of blossoms offer food for birds.
Later, the fruits become dry and they may persist for a year or so
providing an emergency food for squirrels and birds. The deer and
cottontail rabbit find the twigs and bark a most acceptable meal during
the winter. In former years, the sumac was often used for tanning fine
leathers and as a dye because of high content of tannic acid.

    [Illustration: Staghorn Sumac]




                              Hiking Trail


Unlike the shorter interpretive trail, this scenic hiking trail has been
left relatively undisturbed by human influence. Most of us have so few
opportunities to behold nature without the contrivances of a busy
civilization that here we have attempted to minimize signs, rails and
other artificial hiking aides. Therefore, the following pages are
included as a brief guide for this trail.

Walking through this field, you may see a yellow canary-like bird called
the yellow warbler. The male warbler is brilliantly marked ... its
yellow body with striped red breast is like a flash of sunlight as the
bird darts in and out of the greenery.

    [Illustration: yellow warbler]

There are over one hundred different kinds of warblers in the United
States and they are all four to six inches long. Because of their great
variety and the brilliance of their coloring, they have been called the
"butterflies of the bird world."

By now, you have probably seen the red-winged blackbirds. These birds
are found commonly on Burton Island. Red-wings love marshes and wet
fields. They make their nest close to the ground where it is hidden by
reeds, grasses and shrubs. The birds will sit on branches of small trees
and watch intently as you walk by. The red-wings call out many
interesting sounds, from a raspy "oka-fleek, oka-fleek" to a warning
"chuk, chuk." The black birds, with their fiery shoulders, let us know
that we are trespassing on their territory.

    [Illustration: (red-winged blackbird)]

As you enter the forest of young elms, you will notice how the
atmosphere changes. Light is dim. The importance of sunlight is obvious,
for no plants are to be found growing on the forest floor.

Sixty yards beyond the entrance to the elm forest, a circular growth of
young plants reach for sunlight. An opening in the forest canopy allows
these plants to live. The area of direct sunlight is shown by the size
and shape of the growing vegetation. These openings provide food for
browsing animals such as deer.

    [Illustration: (deer)]

Look upon the shady, almost plantless floor, you may see mushrooms and
indian pipes popping up through the dead leaves. Unlike green plants
which need sunlight to manufacture their own food, these saprophytes
obtain food from the dead plants they grow on. Some mushrooms grow upon
fallen logs and branches. Some grow in the soil using the dead plant
matter there for food. Indian pipes are one of the few flowering plants
that are saprophytes.

    [Illustration: _Indian Pipes_ and _mushrooms_]

As you continue along the trail, keep your eyes open for vines which
have wrapped themselves around tall trees to reach the sun. This
adaptation allows a green plant to be rooted in the darkness of the
forest, but to grow in the sunny upper reaches of the forest canopy.
This vine is called bittersweet (nightshade).

    [Illustration: Bittersweet (Nightshade)]

A stone fence runs across the trail. This old fence once restricted the
range of sheep on the island. Blood, sweat, tears and long hours must
have gone into piling these stones, for the fence runs across the entire
island.

    [Illustration: (building a stone fence)]

An old, dead tree stands by the wall. This tree is important for it
offers shelter to thousands of insects and provides a source of food for
hungry birds.

The shelf fungi growing on the tree extract nutrients from the decaying
wood.

As you walk along the lakeshore, look at some of the larger trees
growing there. Two common trees you will see are basswood and red oak.

    [Illustration: Basswood]

    [Illustration: Red Oak]

The American Basswood grows 70-80 feet in height and 2-3 feet in
diameter. In addition to the valuable timber which it produces, the
basswood is highly prized in certain localities for its honey. The
Iroquois Indians made rope from the bark by soaking it in water for
several weeks or months to allow the nonfibrous portions to rot. Then it
was twisted into desired cords.

The northern red oak is one of the largest oaks, occasionally 125 feet
high. Its close-grained, reddish-brown wood is regarded as one of the
most important of the red oak family.


As you hike you will see blown down trees. These rotting trees show us
that nature wastes nothing. Fungi, bacteria, insects and weather are
helping to decay these blowdowns. The resulting humus is a natural soil
fertilizer readily available to growing plants.

During the last ice age, a huge body of water called Lake Vermont spread
from the Green Mountains to the Adirondacks and from Canada to Rutland,
Vermont. Mud and stones from the lake have been compressed for thousands
of years since, forming great rock beds. Along the shoreline of Burton
Island, sheets of rock and flat stones are numerous. Once the shore and
bottom of Lake Vermont, these huge beds of shale and sandstone are now
eroding.

On the southern tip of Burton Island, old and gnarled cedar trees reach
out. The roots of these trees hold firm against the erosive action of
wind, rain and ice.

    [Illustration: Landscape]

Looking out toward the horizon, the expansive views bring the ocean to
mind. Ball Island stands out in front of the jagged peaks of the
Adirondacks and the flats of Sandbar. Do you know the islands around
you?

    [Illustration: KEY MAP]

We at Burton Island State Park hope you have enjoyed this short hike. To
return to the start, you can follow the park road or follow the hiking
trail back.

                            * * * * * * * *

This trail is part of the Vermont State Parks' Nature Interpretation
Program. The program is intended to spark awareness, concern and an
appreciation for the works of nature. All life is unified through the
cycles and interrelationships of nature. People have the responsibility
to act in a life-supporting manner toward their environment. Hopefully,
through understanding, people will strive to respect and protect the
delicate balances which make the earth our healthy home.

                             * * * * * * *

                            STATE OF VERMONT
                  Agency of Environmental Conservation
                    Department of Forests and Parks

                               July 1975




                                -NOTES-


    [Illustration: (view across the lake)]




                          Transcriber's Notes


--Silently corrected a few typos.

--Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

--In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Burton Island State Park: Guide to the
Interpretive Nature Trail and Hiking Trail, by Stephen Antil

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BURTON ISLAND STATE PARK ***

***** This file should be named 60709.txt or 60709.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/7/0/60709/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

